===== PAGE 1 =====
Wondering how all these social sciences papers at
West Point are going to help you in the 'real
world'? Or perhaps you're coveting that MI
designator and want a leg up?
Take it from a former CIA officer and DIA
analyst, the work you're doing in many of your
courses - as well as in consultations at West
Point's Mounger Writing Center - can also help
you hone the habits of mind and writing skills of
an intelligence analyst. That's a career path with
increasing commercial sector as well as
government opportunities.
Even though crafting intelligence analysis can at first feel
like you're being asked to flip the conventional organiza-
tion of academic writing on its head, the skills intelligence
analysts use - understanding the audience, balancing evi-
dence and informed judgements, considering potential bi-
ases, and writing for concision and clarity - will also make
your writing for academic courses more compelling.
The most immediate difference that sets intelligence analy-
sis apart from academic writing is the need to get the criti-
cal information across to the 'consumer' (the specific read-
er for whom you're writing) as directly as possible.
Structurally, this means putting the Bottom Line Up
Front (BLUF). A BLUF structure makes sense when you
consider the audiences to whom analysts often write: key
consumers of U.S. intelligence include the President, the
National Security Council, senior military and executive
branch leadership, and some members of Congress. In the
commercial intelligence realm, timeliness is also crucial as
consumers include corporate executives and staff charged
with keeping employees and facilities safe.
HOW TO WRITE LIKE AN INTELLIGENCE ANALYST
Thea Gioe, Postgraduate Writing Fellow
WFP
∙ promoting excellence in writing & communication ∙
usma.mywconline.com  ∙  westpoint.edu/wpwp
The key to making the
complex comprehensible is
having in mind a specific au-
dience and a very precise in-
telligence question for the
analysis to tackle. Data
dumps and murky analysis
almost always are rooted in
trying to write about a devel-
opment without first asking,
'Who is my audience and
what specific question does it
need answered?'
- Martin Peterson, For-
mer Deputy Executive
Director of CIA

===== PAGE 2 =====
Intelligence Writing for Academics
This writing guide was authored by Ms. Thea Gioe, a Postgraduate Writing Fellow (2019-2020) at the United States Military Acade-
my. It includes one free-use image from the public domain and an original figure. It has been edited and produced in collaboration
with Ms. Wynn Klosky and Dr. Jason Hoppe, West Point Writing Program. 2020.
Above all, intelligence analysis must
be consistently impartial or risk losing
the consumer's trust. Being cognizant
of the potential for bias to influence
analysis requires analysts to clearly
distinguish their judgements from the
evidence they are presenting. The
judgements are frequently expressed
in the BLUF and/or in the impact
statement that follows. The evidence
is then listed, as succinctly as possible,
to directly support the analysis. This is
reflected in each supporting para-
graph, which should lead with a judge-
ment as the topic sentence, followed
by relevant evidence.
Identify and acknowledge potential
evidentiary biases. Intelligence analysts closely consider biases that may be inherent in the ultimate source of the
intelligence or that may have colored the information in the chain of acquisition. These biases can be intentional, as
in a politician providing a statement that encompasses their party's perspective on an issue; such biases may also be
less obvious or diluted - for example, a report from a non-governmental organization that cites statistics provided by
a third-party website. Regardless, all quality intelligence analysis requires due diligence to identify and acknowledge
potential bias.
Cultivate a clear and concise style. Intelligence analysts write clearly and concisely. Paragraphs are focused around
a single topic sentence, all of which serve as evidence to support the BLUF. Word choice is specific and can tend
toward jargon, but simple and straightforward. Keep It Simple and Straightforward (KISS) is a handy pneumonic
that helps ensure efficiency and that the audience is not lost in complex sentences that could lead to confusion or
misunderstanding.
Want to learn more about the art of intelligence analysis?
 A Tradecraft Primer: Structured Analytic Techniques for Improv-
ing Intelligence Analysis. Central Intelligence Agency, March
2009.
 Petersen, Martin. "What I Learned in 40 Years of Doing
Intelligence Analysis for US Foreign Policy Makers," Stud-
ies in Intelligence Studies, 55.1, March 2011.
 Russo, Charles M. "How Intelligence Analysts Can Im-
prove Critical Thinking and Writing Skills,"
www.inpublicsafety.com, 24 Apr 2018.
 Sinclair, Robert S. Thinking and Writing: Cognitive Science and
Intelligence Analysis. Center for the Study of Intelligence,
February 2010.
Writing like an intelligence analyst can
also help you understand especially
dense academic writing. In order to de-
termine the BLUF, an analyst must not only
be an expert on the issues, but also under-
stand his or her audience and what they
need to know in order to make well-
informed decisions.
So, if you get stuck noodling your way
through a dense academic paper, you
can always try writing it as an intelligence
brief in order to help you define your judge-
ments and your evidence, and to help distill
the author's or your points into their sim-
plest, most logical order.
Figure 1. Intelligence writing inverts the conventional structure of academic writing.
